Welcome back to the Data Science Hangout, everybody, and Happy New Year, if I haven't
had a chance to see you yet or say that. If we haven't met before, I'm Rachel and I lead
customer marketing at Posit. If Posit is new to you and you're joining this Hangout, Posit
builds enterprise solutions and open source tools for people who do data science with R and Python.
We're also the company formerly called RStudio. I like to add that in there too. But I'm joined
by my amazing co-host Libby as well. Hello everybody, I'm Libby. I'm a community manager
here at Posit helping to foster our Hangout community and help host the Hangout. And I'm
also a Posit Academy mentor where I help professionals do more with data by learning
how to use R and Python in their jobs. So happy to have you all here with us today. I can see a
few more people joining from the waiting room too. The Hangout is our open space to hear what's going
on in the world of data across all different industries, get to chat about data science
leadership, and connect with other people facing similar things as you. So we get together here
every Thursday at the same time, same place. So if you are watching this as a recording on YouTube
and you want to join us live in the future, there will be details to add it to your own calendar
below. Thank you so much to those of you here who have helped make this the friendly and welcoming
space that it is today. I love getting to see that people are now friends from the Hangout
and getting to chat with each other here in the Zoom chat. We're all dedicated to keeping this
that friendly environment. So if you ever have feedback about your experience or anything at all
that you want to share with me anonymously, good and bad, or even suggestions for topics to dive
deeper on, I will share a Google form in the chat with you right now. You can always reach out to me
on LinkedIn as well. And at the Hangout, we love hearing from you. This is a community-driven
discussion. This is not like a podcast where Rachel and I are hosting. The questions come from
all of you. So we really, really encourage you to get together in the chat, connect with other
attendees, briefly introduce yourself, where you are, what you do, what you do for fun, share your
LinkedIn, share a link to your website, all of that stuff. And we love hearing from you, no matter
your years of experience or your title, your industry, what languages you use or don't use,
this is a place for you and we want you to know that this is a place to like hang out with each
other and us. There are three ways to jump in today and ask those questions to get things started.
You can raise your hand in Zoom. We'll call you to just unmute and ask your question. You can put
your question in the Zoom chat. We will call on you to unmute and ask your question. If you happen
to be somewhere where you cannot talk or your mic doesn't work, just put an asterisk somewhere in
your question and we'll ask it for you. There's also a Slido link. You can ask questions anonymously
if you feel like and that's totally fine as well. Awesome. Well, thank you all so much again for
being here today. I'm so excited to be joined by our two other co-hosts today, Rich Iannone and
Michael Chow, software engineers here at Posit. And we'd love to have you both introduce yourself
first and maybe share a little bit about your roles here at Posit, but also what you like to do
outside of work too. Rich, do you want to go first? Yeah. So yeah, I'm Rich. I work at Posit.
Been there for quite a while, since 2018 or thereabouts. And yeah, working on packages.
Started with R, now more lately working on Python packages with Michael. For fun, I like to read,
watch movies, play some instruments, go outside sometimes. Maybe not now, it's like 20 degrees out,
really chilly. But still, I try to make it outside because, you know, fresh air is good.
So that's basically me. Love it. Michael, you want to go next? Yeah. Hey, I'm Michael Chow.
I'm in Philadelphia and working with Rich on Great Tables. In my free time, what do I like to do?
I really like to cook a lot. And I've realized lately too, I thrift a ton. I'm just always
combing through, I feel like, thrift stores. So a lot of good stuff, you know, out there.
What's your favorite thing you've thrifted? Wow, that's a great question. Actually, I think my
favorite thing is something I didn't thrift, but passed on and has haunted me my whole life, which
is a year or two ago, there was this beautiful fringy leather jacket that I assume a cowboy
died in and then left to this thrift store. And for some reason, I passed on it. But every day,
I think that I could have been that fringy cowboy and I gave that opportunity away. But maybe
someone else out there now is living their best fringe leather jacket life. So maybe there's like
a silver lining to the story. I hope the fringe jacket comes back around to you somewhere.
Yeah, thanks. Well, I know we just kind of introduced yourself,
both of you around GT and Great Tables, but I thought it might be really helpful to start
off by talking about what those both are, if somebody has never heard of them before.
I can introduce GT and Great Tables. Basically, you need to make tables and you use R or Python,
you can use them to make tables. We made that because it's such an obvious missing thing,
like static tables, like the non-interactive type you see everywhere, basically. It just wasn't
really a good or maintained solution that had different output types that you can just put your
data in from a data frame and just get a nice looking table out wherever you need it. So I
jumped at the chance to work on this when I found out I could work on this,
which was pretty soon after joining Posit, actually, within RStudio.
That is GT, Great Tables, in a nutshell. Yeah, and I think something that drew me to it, too,
was that I went to a Posit conf and I saw all the people interested in tables, and it really
knocked me back, because in Python I had never styled a table before, and so I felt like I was
missing out on this big party, and people were coming up to Rich. I saw Daniel, who does GT
summary, chatting with Rich. There were these GT heads, and so I feel like that really wanted me,
as a Python user, to get in on the action. That is a great point. Rich is really great
at engaging the community and getting people talking about and just engaging around a software
thing in general. I feel like that's a talent, Rich. I would love to know if you have any tips
on how you go about promoting a package. There are so many people out there who have made amazing
things that they don't talk about very much and don't get used a lot. Yeah, basically, just don't
be shy, like I was before. Just get out there and say things. More importantly, have stuff to
talk about. Add new features. Ask what people want. Answer questions. Do everything you possibly can
in the time that you have. I think it's helpful just to be there, essentially, and listen. If
people want a feature, don't say, no, no, I don't want that. Just make the feature happen, I think,
if it's within reason, I think. That's been my thing. So yeah, just getting out there,
talking a whole lot. Do you feel like LinkedIn, talking on LinkedIn, was the best way to go about
that? Or do you think there's other avenues that are better these days? LinkedIn gets
the highest number of impressions. I mean, I worked hardest at LinkedIn. It's kind of weird,
because I've got a lot of contacts and followers, and maybe that was to my advantage.
But I found LinkedIn gets the highest reception of basically any other social network. So I'm
trying Blue Sky. I'm trying to get in there and post things, but it's kind of slow going.
It really helps if you have a big account to start. But even if you don't, it's totally fine.
You can just get started somewhere. So yeah, LinkedIn, for me, is kind of where it's at
currently. Awesome. Michael, anything to add to that?
I feel like Rich is way better at the social media connecting, but I do feel like conferences
are so good. Being able to poke around and just ask people what they're using, and also to have
the chance to sit by someone and have them pull up something, I think that kind of stuff's really
useful. But the other thing I'd flag is that Rich and I think Curtis ran the Posit Table contest,
which seemed like a really neat way to kind of connect with people and engage people
in the discussion. Yeah, I wanted to celebrate the people who entered the table contest and
those that won that. I don't know if, Curtis, you could share the link in the
chat here as well. Those are super impressive.
Every time I see the submissions, I'm like, wow, you can do that with this?
You just never imagine it. And you see them and you're like, whoa.
I get blown away every single year that we have that contest. It's like, damn, each time.
Well, Michael, I know you just mentioned conferences, so it might be a good time to ask
you about. You were at a conference this week. Do you want to tell us a little bit about that?
But also, how did you go about connecting with people and starting to talk about
the stuff you're working on? Yeah, that's a great question. So I went to the
Transportation Research Board annual meeting. So it has, I think, over 13,000 people in DC
for all things transportation. I'm really interested in public transit, but TRB also
includes things like anything to do with transportation. So roads, there are asphalt
people there talking about the best kind of asphalt. But I think what was really useful was
I met up with a lot of people at public agencies who were using R and RStudio, and a bunch of
people were using GT in Minneapolis's metro planning organization. It was kind of a funny
one because I didn't really know a lot about the area, so I felt kind of like I was cosplaying a
transportation person. So this was maybe a funny example of one where I was kind of out of my
element. But I feel like going into a really new place and kind of like finding the R and Python
users was a good way to see like where are people analyzing data that I otherwise wouldn't really
identify quickly. And I felt like those people were really excited to talk because they're
like pretty deep in a domain, so it's less likely that they're popping into like PositConf
and just like chatting about data science generally. How did you actually find them?
Like you're like the people who are really excited about Python and R,
but at this huge conference, how did you find them? So maybe this is a good social thing. I
made sure to post on LinkedIn before I went to the conference about a week before,
just that I'd be there and like what I was looking for. We cheated a little bit. I put
this post on the Great Tables blog. I'll link it here. So I just made a blog post titled
Contributing to Public Transit Data Analysis and Tooling. So it's kind of like I tried to set up
all the flags before the conference to say like why am I here? What am I looking for?
And this blog post really served as almost like a calling card, like a way to explain really easily
to people what am I doing, and with the hopes that if they know like a colleague that they'd
be able to just pass it to them too. So there was a little bit of setup to kind of make it work
with LinkedIn in the blog post. Nice. That's it. That's a great tip. I see, Stephanie,
you asked a question a little bit earlier. Do you want to jump in here first?
Of course. I'm in the middle of eating lunch. Yes, no problem. So my question relates to like
a current workflow we have at work that will have people who are not data people make table
templates in Excel to define analyses. It really helps us know what they're looking for in an
analysis. And then we have someone run the analysis to populate the table. And we use
OpenXL SX for this right now. But it would be great if they could somehow make templates
that would work with a GT workflow, but they're not our people. And has there been any thoughts
about that? Are you saying going from like Excel to GT? Yeah. There's actually a package out that
does pretty much this. And like, I didn't put in the GT, like read me like I do for other packages
that use GT. I think it's called GTS or something to that effect. And I forgot and I feel bad for
not knowing this, but there is like a new, it's new. Like it was just out in the last two, three
months. But yeah, it's sweet. It goes from Excel to GT. I'd love to have the other way going. And
that's kind of like a thing of promise to the law back, like having GT to Excel. But I think this
seems to fit exactly what you need. At least check it out. If you can find it, I'm sorry.
Can you do it? Can you do it without data that pre-exists? Because we struggle,
sorry I'm so glad you asked this question. We struggle with the same thing, right? And so we're
often trying to just come up with like synthetic data to populate a table to then replace it with
like a bunch of X's and like placeholders, right? But I really wish there was a way to just come up
with a shell that didn't presuppose data exists. Yeah. And I think some approaches take like,
have that like GT reg, not GT reg. There's another package that basically populates,
has like a plan for like, and doesn't require data. You basically just start with like a template,
exactly what you said. And it's a pharma package. And the name totally escapes me again. I'm really
bad at coming up with GT affiliates. I see Daniel's, Daniel's going to know. Daniel,
what is it? Please Daniel, help me out here. So we're building in the pharma space. We're
working a lot with something called Analysis Results Datasets right now. And it's very,
very easy to build an empty ARD. That's the Analysis Result Dataset. And if you have an ARD,
then you can go straight to tables via GT summary, which we're also kind of generalizing
to be able to do kind of anything at this point with ARDs. So, Travis, we can talk.
Or anyone else who's interested, of course.
Grilled.
Marcos, I see you have your hand up.
Yes, I'm coming off mute. So one, I had a question because I posted an issue. The most
recent version of GreatTables broke ShinyLive compatibility. And I'm just curious how important
it is to y'all to keep ShinyLive working with GT. It's the new dependency on CCS inline
that doesn't work. So I posted an issue in the GitHub. I just thought I'd mention it here since
I got the ears of all of you. And then so you can address that. But at a high level, I do like
GreatTables. I've started using it more and more. I think I'm a Python person. So I didn't really
use it on the R side. And I posted another comment, I think, recently about bootstrap styles,
which I think someone responded to. And I appreciate that feedback. But just at a high
level, I just want to encourage you all to think about tables as more than just for numbers or
even charts. I use tables a lot in a lot of my web apps and stuff. And obviously, I put buttons
in tables. I need links to be conditional on other columns and tables. So just think big when you're
thinking about tables. Because I feel like a lot of table packages really focus on formatting
numbers or whatever. And you support markdown, which is great. And that really helps me
for some things. But I was looking at some code that I wrote a week ago where I dynamically create
these tables from pandas data frames in dash, in Plotly dash. And it's crazy what I have to do.
If these two columns exist, and this thing needs to be hyperlinked, and I do all this stuff,
and I wrote all this code to do it. So it's just a high level comment that tables are awesome,
and you can do so many things with tables. And so don't think of them as these static things of
someone's got a bunch of data, and they want to show a number. Sometimes people want to do really
interesting things inside of these tables. Yeah, I totally agree. And I'm doing that,
too, actually, using great tables as software or something for something else.
And you need to go into the guts of great tables to tease out a few things you need to program
tables. So you can definitely expose more of those things if you want, maybe create an issue for
that. And I saw your issue on CSS inline. And what you can do is make that an optional install,
because that raw, as raw HTML, doing that one trick of inlining CSS, that seems very extra.
So we can definitely make that one package an optional install, so you don't have to break
ShinyLive. So that's something we can do. Very cool. Yeah. I do think, too, on the ShinyLive
note, now that ShinyLive, so we went on this big arc where another engineer at Posit, George Stagg,
just got pollers working in WebAssembly. So ShinyLive, I don't know if now or very soon,
should support pollers. Yeah, I'm very excited. I'm very excited about that. I actually rewrote a
bunch of code. I had a ShinyLive app and I rewrote a bunch of code to use pandas because I couldn't
use pollers in ShinyLive. And then a week later, they were like, oh, pollers is going to work in
PyEditor. Oh, nice. Yeah, yeah. So I think that's one of the reasons we haven't been using ShinyLive
too much either, is we've been using a lot of pollers in our docs and just working with great
tables. But now that ShinyLive does or will really soon support pollers, I think we'll start using it
quite a bit more for examples and demos and things like that. So hopefully that'll let us
kind of keep it in the loop a bit tighter to keep an eye on these kinds of breaking changes.
Yeah, and I think we're generally trying to reduce dependencies, like the trail of dependencies on
great tables. We should do the same thing for GT, but for great tables, at least we're going to try
to get rid of some things or replace things that make it heavy because of issues like this,
essentially. Rich, I am struggling to find the package that you mentioned. Yeah, me too. I
swear it exists. And I saw it initially on, I think, LinkedIn or somewhere else, maybe.
Okay. It has GT in the title. How can we make it more broadly known and easier? Is it GT Extras?
No, it's not GT Extras. That is great, by the way, but it's not that. Yeah.
It's like a new thing. I thought it was like GT format. There's T format, which I know does ARDs
and things like that, but maybe that's not it. We will find it. I will follow up one way or another
and promote this thing and put it on the README for GT. Perfect. Ted, I see you had some questions
on table design, and there's a long thread with people sharing links, so I thought it might be
helpful to ask that now, too. Oh, sure. Yeah, so I asked it in chat. Just curious if you all have
any resources for papers or books on table design principles. I'm putting together a workshop.
It's kind of a two-part workshop with table design principles and GT great tables.
Oh, yeah. We got stuff. We got stuff. There's this old thing that we talk about all the time,
this 1949 manual of tabular presentation. It's a goldmine for ideas.
I know it's old, but actually it's got a ton of good stuff that's relevant today.
For a newer thing, right behind me, there's this book.
I'll show me the numbers. Look at this. It even has tables on the front cover.
That never happens. I literally bought that on Amazon yesterday. Excellent. Yes, a great book.
Of course, it has more on plots, like rafts, they call them, but it has tables, which is
amazing. And so there's good stuff there. Other than these two things, it's kind of hard. We've
been looking. That's not like we haven't tried. There's not much. Maybe that's where we step in.
I don't know. Yeah, for sure. But yeah, that's really helpful. Thanks. Yeah, you're welcome.
And before we jump, what was the name of that book?
Oh, show me the numbers. It's got a really catchy name. So yeah, here it is again, in case you
want to screenshot this forever. Yeah, it's really good. Look at that hardcover. Thank you.
Uh, let's see. Oh, we'll call him. Let's call on somebody else who went into the chat first,
and then Libby, I'll hand it back over to you. Abigail, do you want to jump in here next?
Okay, thank you. So I swear this is not an attempt to make you troubleshoot my
Great Tables heat map problem on this call. But it was New Year's Eve, and I was trying to get my
table to work, and I couldn't. But my question is really, like, how much work do we need to do
in issues to make it useful for you guys when we're reporting an issue? Because I totally,
like, did not do the thing where I made it reproducible and reported it on GitHub,
because I was like, that seems like a lot of work. So like, how much work do we need to do?
Like, what do we need to get you in order to give you an issue that you can actually do something
useful with? Well, I think not much. Just, like, we can get the conversation going. Just maybe a
screenshot and maybe some code, and then we can just discuss and then, you know, zero in on the
actual issue and what needs to be done. Trick is just to start. Don't be shy like I am all the
time with issues. Just get in there, and we'll eventually get to the harder problem. Okay,
thank you. Yeah, and I feel bad that it's not working for you. No, it's okay. I honestly,
I think I know what the workaround is, but I just, like, don't want, it's, like, a bad
workaround. I don't want to do it. So sometimes you just got to do that. But yeah, we'll try,
we'll try and fix it. Yeah, just get in there. Yeah, I think it's fair. So I think some tools
really push for, like, a reproducible example right out of the gate. Like, and you might see,
like, templates that try to kind of push into that format. I think, like, I don't think it
hurts, like, to just open an issue, and if you're in the middle of it, just mention. Like, you could,
you could have a single sentence that just says, like, super fast what you're seeing. And I think
that's totally fair, because worst case, we just ask for more information. I think best case, like,
we actually can just read that sentence, and it's, like, something we've thought about or
can point to more information. I think that's fair. Like, it's very fast to kind of, like,
scan a sentence and either ask for more or, like, maybe we actually know something about it and can
help you, like, out right away. And something super effective is just, like, a screenshot
marked up with, like, lines or desired things. I've seen that a bunch of times, and that's actually
way better than a text description half the time. It just really just gets right to it.
I love it. I think Abigail might be feeling something similar to that
I've felt before, which was, like, I see tense interactions in issues where other people have
not given enough information, and then it kind of makes you shy about doing it yourself. Like,
I'm going to get yelled at, right? But it's really nice to know that Rich and Michael are both really
nice, everybody. So if you're submitting something, we won't scold. Right, they're not going to scold
you. You're in good hands. Wonderful to know. And kind of on this same thread of, like,
anxiety or nerves around doing stuff like this, I wanted to ask both you, Rich, and Michael,
how many packages did you develop secretly or privately before you were actually comfortable
publishing packages and putting them out there and letting people see them? And how many do you
have just, like, sitting in the wings or the back burner that you don't talk about?
Michael, you go first. Yeah, Steve on this.
It's such a great question. So many. I just feel like, well, I feel like the frequency of packages
has stayed the same. Like, lots of small packages, like, year to year. I would say there's, like,
so many, like, pour one out to the ones that didn't make it even out of the gate, like, that are,
like, a repo with just an idea where I had a big dream and then gave up on it right away. So I
think to your question, like, how many packages have I done before, like, releasing things? I
think that so many because I think it's good just to get into the habit of building packages. And,
like, it's okay to do it in the open, but I would say there wasn't really, like, a turning point
where I was, like, now I can start releasing good packages to the world. I think I just did really
bad packages and they got, like, better and better over time. And now there's, like, a healthier mix
of, like, good and bad packages. But I would really lean into the joy of putting a bad package into
the world as kind of, like, I think at the worst, a bad package is almost like a blog post, like,
and giving them a lot of, like, work that you did. And that's, like, when I was working on my
Ph.D. in psychology, I was, like, putting out packages that I don't think anyone really used
or needed, but at the least it was good for me and, like, good to show maybe my collaborators
and even think about, like, what I could have done differently. And I think that's, like,
good to show maybe my collaborators and even think about how I would set up and kind of try
to communicate things. So I would say so many packages and still doing a lot of bad packages
today. I don't really do them under the radar as much. I try to just do them as a public package.
So learning out loud. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So much of our advice has come down to, like,
just do it anyway, even if you're nervous about it. Rich, what about you?
Yeah. I started this, like, 10 years ago, probably around the same time as Michael,
maybe a little over 10 years ago. Doesn't matter. A lot of bad packages. I mean, I was learning
stuff at the same time, so I didn't mind. But I saw people doing stuff out in the open. I was,
like, I want to do that, too. It was great. And, like, some people actually use the packages,
the early stuff that I wrote. And, like, it was fun to interact with people and just get to know
people. So that was even better than, like, writing the package half the time. It's, like,
interacting with people. It's, like, oh, my God, this is amazing. And they would help you out.
Blew my mind that people would help out. So, yeah, no regrets about bad packages. And, like,
the first one that made it to, like, when I was working on R to CRAN was, like, I don't know when
that was, like, 2014, like, a year after I started. Some of them I just kept, like, off CRAN,
like, never on CRAN. But, yeah, I had some rough experiences with CRAN initially, too. Like, the
first package I submitted was a data package, and it got rejected for editorial reasons. And that's
totally fine. But it didn't, like, break my spirit, as it were. I just submitted something,
like, maybe six months afterwards and got in there. And it was fun all the while. Like,
there's ups and downs, is all I'm saying. But mostly ups, I would say.
Everything's easier when you have friends.
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, I do. One fun example of a kind of funky package I've been, like, tinkering on for the
past few years is this thing called Data Backend. It's not really, like, exciting for data analysis.
It's more like something someone might use behind the scenes when making a package.
But the reason I bring it up is that if you look at it, it's, like, there's one issue,
which is, like, Joe Chang three years ago just collecting cobwebs. And there's no docs. It's
just a big readme. But it was really good for me to, like, just put the idea out. And I would
give it to people at conferences to kind of check their temperature on it. We start out by just
copying this package into GreatTables. So I just copied the Python code into GreatTables.
And so in a lot of ways, this repo is just me kind of, like, tinkering on an idea and kind of,
like, laying the parts out for people to be able to talk about it. And I've really enjoyed that
kind of workflow where it's just, like, I'm not really trying to get people to install it right
now. I'm more trying to just have conversations and, like, keep it in one place for chatting with people.
Thank you. Well, on this topic of porting packages, Rich, I know you're working on porting
point blank to Python. And this is a question that's come up quite a bit lately in the community.
What are the best practices for maintaining equivalent R and Python packages? And what are
some of the challenges? Yeah. So best practices, they're pretty much what we make them. Because
I'm not aware of very many of them, like, with ports. That's my fault.
But I think, like, having a somewhat matched APIs is good.
Exactly as, you know, to pipe together and you get some results. So in Python, of course, it's
not going to be that. It's going to be a bunch of chain methods with some, you know, class to start
things off. But having the names the same, like, or pretty close to the same is great. And features
sort of matched up is also great. So if you have, say, you're working in a place that does both,
you can have both versions working at the same time, or you can migrate from one to the other
pretty painlessly, one hopes. So that's kind of, like, my idea of best practices for porting
these things in. Michael, what do you think of all that? Because we did, like, great tables in GT, right?
Wait, sorry, can someone repeat the question? Sorry, I'm coming off a cold. So I like,
I'm not, I'm finding that I hear the question. And I'm like, I've got this. And then I begin
talking. And I'm like, what was the question? So I want to be sure that I have the original
question. And then I'm so ready to answer. It was about best practices for maintaining
equivalent R and Python packages. What are some of the challenges there? Yeah,
that's a really great question. I, okay, I think some of the big challenges are, like,
how, I think consistency, like, as long as, like, the longer you stay with the two packages,
just kind of, like, very close side by side, the better your life is. And I mean, like,
so for example, I ported a package called pins from R to Python. And one thing that was in my
head for a long time was, like, I want to be able to look at the Python code, and actually be able
to guess where in the R code, the same bit, the same idea is. And even when I thought in my head,
maybe there's a better way to, like, name something or lay something out. I stuck with that a long
time, because I didn't want to have to think about two packages. I almost wanted to be able to
navigate between each of them. And I find that really helpful when porting is, can I, like,
think in both of these packages at once? And that I think that's, like, favoring kind of consistency
over, like, innovation, when you're translating a package.
But on the other hand, I think if you go too literally, you run the risk of kind of
really applying, like, you kind of slow yourself down right out of the gate. And so I think what
I often do when translating a package is I get a giant notebook, and I just take really copious
notes on the original thing. And, like, a lot of use cases and what it looks like in operation.
Just to get a sense for the big picture. So I can make any, like, little tweaks to the design
before kind of starting out. So I think it's balancing, like, the consistency of
these two things are, like, essentially the same to, like, letting in a little bit of
innovation that'll help you kind of move faster.
I've got a bit of follow-up from before. In the chat, someone found that package that does
Excel to GT. I forgot what it was. And funnily enough, like, the name is almost spelled like
forget. It's F-O-R-G-T-S. For GTS, I guess. Anyways, so it's in GitHub. Just look for
for GTS. Like, the word for, and then, like, not the number four, but, you know, F-O-R-G-T-S.
Perfect. And highly to win some sort of prize there for finding that.
Thank you so much.
Well, real quickly, while we're talking about GT and GreatTables together, I was wondering,
like, was the name choice of GreatTables versus, like, GT-Python a conscious branding decision?
Oh, yeah. I forgot how it went down. Me and Michael were brainstorming for a while,
and then, like, somehow GreatTables entered. Do you remember this, Michael? Because, like,
it was, like, such a fateful day. And, like, I think we just struck gold. And it was, like,
great moment. Yeah. Yeah, I think what happened is that GT was taken on PyPI. And I think,
Trisha, I haven't loved naming packages the same thing across languages, because I think it hurts
with kind of reaching the new audience sometimes. Like, people in Python don't like to be called
something Py. You know, I think they like to be their own thing. But I think GT was taken on PyPI.
So we had a big dilemma, which was we can't name this package this thing. And I think we,
in talking, I didn't even know what GT stood for. Enrichment mentioned it originally meant
grammar of tables. Yeah, but I think it's sort of, like, minimal. I didn't, like, never said
grammar of tables. It's not mentioned in the docs. Yeah, it's not in the docs anywhere.
I think we realized there was a chance, there was a little tiny chance to, like, rewrite history
and just go back in time and pretend, like, imagine that GT stands for GreatTables.
So it's almost like an Easter egg for our people. But for Python people, it feels like
an original name. And it's available to pip install.
Awesome. Thank you. Yeah, I will go ahead and admit that I did not realize that GT was grammar
of tables. And I was thinking it was GreatTables as well. But then when you said grammar of tables,
I was like, oh, wait, I think I have read that somewhere. I think I googled this at some point.
Wasn't from us. It wasn't. Okay. My goodness. I don't know why we don't do that. We're just weird
that way, I think. Well, there are definitely people out there who are fielding that question,
because as a person who teaches R and Python, I get that question. Well, what does GT stand for?
What does GT stand for? What does all these things stand for? And I remember getting that
question one day and going, gosh, I don't know. Yeah, eight years on or whatever. There's a lot
of GT lore, like, still a lot to many depths to be plumbed when it comes to GT.
Nice. Well, maybe that's one of the bits of advice on getting your package out there and
making it known as just being enigmatic and calling it something that's going to make people
ask questions. Yeah. Otherness when it comes to packages, you need that sometimes.
Awesome. Well, there are so many amazing questions in the chat. I wanted to point out that there were
a couple of questions that didn't get asked, but I think that they did get answered by Rich and
Michael. Neil's question, I think, got answered. Rich, your question, I think, got answered.
I see a question, Javier, if you're still on with us that you could unmute and ask.
Hey, the absolute worst product, by the way, in 2025 is the Zoom web chat.
Like, I'm trying to use it. I'm unable to download the actual Zoom app. So, I don't even know what I
asked. What did I ask? Oh, no. Okay. So, let me, I'm going to just paste your question, Javier,
directly into the chat so everybody can see it. It was about data entry with GT. Okay. So,
in some of the shiny apps that we build, we've experimented with, like, our hands-on table
or DT. Usually, we use DT. But, like, the mechanics of data entry, pushing data back to a server
or S3 or something and getting the data back or, you know, using something where you're polling so
that the tables that, you know, populate other parts of the app or other people that are on the
same app, you know, like, getting it all to work fluidly, it's just nasty in DT. And I didn't know
if there's any, I don't use GT, first off, for grade tables. I wish I did. I just don't really
have a need for it right now in my role. But I work with people who potentially could. And if
there was a way to do data entry with it, I think that would be awesome. So, maybe this is for both
me and Michael. Because, like, the shiny team has an editable table. But that isn't high shiny, like,
shiny for Python. And our hands-on table is a thing or just hands-on table is a thing that is
sometimes used in different things, but, like, barely because it requires a lot of engineering
work, I would imagine, to get that working right for all cases. Sorry to ask on Michael again,
but do you know what the shiny team is trying to do with their, maybe, like, spinning it off,
making it a separate thing? Because, like, they have something going there, right?
Yeah, I think for data entry, they have the data grid, which is designed to be editable.
And let me find it. It's a funny, it's kind of a funny topic. I feel like,
if you're talking about, like, yeah, being able to show a table and then let people edit
the values inside the table. That's right. Yeah, exactly.
It's kind of tricky. We have, like, I mean, you know, data science should be objective.
But what ends up happening in my team a lot is, like, we're presenting stuff to leaders. And we're
like, this is what the model is projecting. And they're like, we don't like that. Change that 83.2
to, you know, 82.6 because Jeff over here did some analysis and we trust his numbers. It's like, okay,
cool. And so it's kind of this feedback loop where we do this live. We're doing this live right now
with DT. But, like, the table's quite basic, you know. And I love the ability to, like,
add sparklines or just a different level of, like, aesthetics that GT can do.
Yeah, I think it's tricky. Like, you can kind of do this in Excel if you, like, format a table in
Excel. Obviously, you can, like, edit all the cells and update. It feels like whenever we
talk with engineers about editable tables, that it's almost like its own kind of beast. It, like,
brings in so many tricky dynamics, like needing to kind of re-render everything and all that,
that it almost feels like it's been easier to kind of, like, let another thing be the
editable table, like the Shiny Data Grid, and then GT be just the kind of, like, static.
I'll have to check that out. Admittedly, I just learned about the Shiny Data Grid today,
so I'll definitely look at that. Yeah, thank you.
Yeah. And I was in analytics before I was at Imposit, our studio. And the thing that worked
for me, take it with a grain of salt or whatever, is using Google Sheets and just pulling the data
in rapid, you know, like, as part of a job or just manually to a set. A lot of people in the
chat are saying that, too. It can be Excel. Some people use Excel. Some people use Google Sheets
or both. It's a little strange. But I think that is probably the ticket,
because those other things are, like you said, probably pretty flaky in lots of ways.
Thanks. Yeah, I appreciate it.
Yeah, no problem.
I wanted to do a quick shout out here to Luis, because I know, as we were all talking about for
GTS and sharing the package link, Luis is the author and maintainer of that package and is
actually here in the Hangout today. Luis, no pressure to say anything, but I just wanted to
call that out. And feel free to jump in and say hi if you wanted to.
Yeah, I'm going to say amazing work, because it's, you know, we should have more stuff that
works with Excel. I mean, we have XLSX, but not anything really for GT or gray tables at the
moment. And a lot of people use Excel. It's, like, not going away. So we should have solutions that
involve using Excel. Absolutely.
Well, Arsines, I see you had a question in the chat a bit earlier. Do you want to go next?
Sure. Thanks, Rachel. This was for Michael who were, and maybe Rich as well, if you had an
experience like this. But Michael, you mentioned doing some work on a package while you were
doing a PhD. And, you know, you were kind of learning some of this stuff while you were
doing your PhD in psych. And what I'm curious about is how you went about learning the software
development stuff that you needed to know to build packages while you were doing that. And
just kind of, this is a little bit, I guess, selfish as well, because I actually published
the package on CRAN, I want to say in April. And it was, that was the part that was, like,
a complete puzzle to me. How I got it done, I'll never know. But yeah, so that was, you know,
do you have any recommended things to read for all that stuff? Yeah, that's a good question.
I think looking back, well, the one big thought I have is that when I was doing research and
kind of trying to package up my analyses, I feel like
both those things are so big that it was, I think it always ended up just better to focus
on one thing. Like a lot of times with the research, the research itself is often so
involved that to research and package is kind of a big job. I feel like in retrospect,
what happened often was if you can, like, make things reasonably nice, right, and reasonably
reusable, it's like, if you end up using them for, like, across, like, a couple pieces of research,
then you're in a good position to start thinking about packaging. But in retrospect, I think
I really would have, like, really done, like, the research and then maybe, like,
toggled to packaging a little bit and then gotten back into research.
But in terms of resources, I think, yeah, I wish I had good suggestions. I think
I did a lot of the classic things and just read internet tutorials. And I do think for our
things like the use this package is really sort of indispensable. And, like, have this book on
package development is really great. But I think the thing I would do today
is just really focus on this idea of the rule of three, which is, like, before you try to,
like, consolidate things into a function or a package, just use the code and write it out,
like, three times or in three use cases. And then once you have those use cases, you're in a good
place to kind of go back and really think about how would I consolidate this. I feel like that
would probably be the most useful thing for me because that would let me, like, do the job
in a realistic way and then go back and kind of think about how would I kind of consolidate a lot
of this and spend time, like, studying and figuring it out. But I wish I had a good book,
but I unfortunately it was a lot of kind of internet stuff.
Well, I guess. Oh, sorry.
Oh, go right. How's this? Eric just posted the rule of three for Wikipedia.
Wikipedia, if anybody wants to look at it.
Cool. So my question was, so, yeah, I guess it was a little unclear, but I was curious about,
coming from the social sciences, which I did as well in economics, how did you go about learning
the technical stuff that's, like, all the workflow stuff for, like, GitHub and all that,
getting all that right? What kind of resources you focused on?
I didn't. I think it was a lot of kind of browsing the internet, unfortunately. The one thing that
allowed it to happen is that I would say with two or three years left, I kind of realized I wanted
to be able to switch out into software engineering or data science. And so that at least mentally
kind of freed me up to do more, like, studying. I think I sort of started to focus a bit less
on research and really toying with software engineering problems. But I wish, unfortunately,
there weren't any really specific resources that I looked at. I wish I had better recommendations.
Same thing happened for me, for learning, like, mechanics of, like, workflows and stuff. It kind
of, like, people would just say, why don't you do this? I'm like, oh, yeah, maybe I'll do that. I'll
look into that. And then it just sort of happens, right? When you're in it, you can't help but do
things that people do because you get sometimes nudged in those directions. It's kind of weird
how that happens. I felt like I was just bumping around. I mean, I got it done, right? But I felt
like I was like, okay, I'm going to do this now. I'm going to try this thing that I saw on this
blog or whatever. And it all worked. And I got, I understand it at a high level what I did. But
yeah, just learning the weeds of it all was. I think that it's kind of how it goes. It's
this quasi-random walk you do. And eventually you just, you fall into, like, things you're supposed
to do. Yep, just got to do it. Yeah. Thank you for the great question, Arsenis. I wanted to ask,
because we are getting to the top of the hour somehow. This hour goes by so quickly.
We always ask about career advice. Is there any career advice that you've gotten or that you've
given that you think is really, really valuable? And I'll direct this to both of you, whoever wants
to go first. Michael, you go. Okay. You go. Yeah. It's a great question. I think that
some of the best advice I think is out there on the internet. I think Dave Robinson has really
good advice on putting your work out there. And I think, like, two pieces that stick out to me are
his advice. You have permission not to be boring for documentation and teaching.
That it's a real art, but I think there's so much value in putting the interesting part first
and then working back from that. A lot of people build forward when they write docs or tutorials.
They, like, show you how to build the whole thing, and then finally they're like, now you can run it
and see something interesting happen. I love the advice, you have permission not to be boring,
which just tells you to put the interesting bit first and then figure out all the details.
The other thing is that he has, I think he has a posit for our Sudoconf talk on
the unreasonable effectiveness of public work or something. And I think he's so good at encouraging
people to blog, but one of my favorite things that he said is, like, a little rule of thumb
is, like, if it's something you, like, mention to three people, then it's worth putting in a blog.
And I think that's a really nice rule of thumb for thinking about how can I go from just, like,
chatting with folks to finding something to write about. And one thing he does a lot or used to do
is he would write, like, review a year, like, looking back on one year at, like, Stack Overflow,
two years at Stack Overflow. I think that type of stuff is really nice for
getting your work out there. So I think that's some of the best advice I've sort of gotten
on writing and public work over the years.
Yeah, for me, what worked and maybe what might work for other people is just, like,
producing things and getting it out there. So open source packages was a great sort of
way to network with people, meet people, sort of prove that I can do the thing I want to do.
Super good. So that's a good recommendation. And also the documentation, not being boring stuff.
I throw weird stuff in my documentation all the time. I don't know if you've seen it.
Kind of makes it fun. Hopefully not too, like, distracting. But yeah, I would just, like,
get out there, produce things, talk about it, and then good things may happen.
I love that. Thank you. So I know there are a few questions we weren't able to
get to. So I'm thinking, Rich and Michael, maybe I can gather those and they can
be helpful for future blog posts, too. Definitely.
But one more question I wanted to ask you both. If you had six months to work on any other problem,
what would you focus on? If you just magically had all this time suddenly.
I feel like one that's been haunting me is I okay, so in 2020, I gave a talk on
Suba, which was an attempt to port dplyr to Python. And I was because I was going nuts.
I was a Python user. I really wanted, like, tidyverse style data analysis.
Today I feel like Polars is a really good option. Like, I think it's good enough,
and it provides enough that it's the feel of the tidyverse and dplyr in Python.
And that's been an absolute dream. I think if I had six months, I would take a good pass at,
like, dbplyr for Polars. Like, converting Polars code to SQL. Because when I was doing data science,
I used dbplyr nonstop. And so I think now that I'm happy with Polars,
I'm, like, finding myself wishing I could fire it off on any database. And I actually think that
will probably happen eventually. Like, there are great tools like narwhals that can run Polars.
Like, you can use Polars code, but actually run pandas. But I think that's, if I had six months,
that is what I might swing at. Yeah, what do you got, Rich?
I think I would do stuff like data management or things I could share with other people,
like in a data organization, that is useful in terms of, like, getting to grips with data or
understanding data or seeing what's wrong with data. And it's more than enough for six months
to do there. Like, there's and I don't know. I know. I can sort of see, like, that's not focused
on as much as it should be in the Python space. So, that's probably what I would do.
Well, thank you both so much for taking the time to chat with us here at the Hangout. And thank you
all for the great questions today, too. Rich and Michael, are there any, like, recent blogs or
anything you think we should all be checking out right now? Anything new coming out from GT or
Great Tables we should be aware of this week? I mean, there were a flurry of blog posts in
December that you haven't, you know, seen them on the Great Tables blog. So, just go to the Great
Tables website to search it up and then look for a great blog post for you.
Search it up and then look for a great blog post or blog. And there's, like, a smattering of new
ones from last month. Awesome. I'm going to put one here from the Posit blog as well, which was
all about what you did with publication quality tables in 2024, too. Also a good one, yeah.
Well, have a great rest of the day, everybody. It's so nice to see you.
And hope you're having a great start to the new year.